---
layout: page
title: Open Concepts and Principles
nav_order: 4
---
 
<details markdown="block"> 
  <summary> 
      &#9658; Inhaltsverzeichnis Kapitel (ausklappbar) 
  </summary>
 
1. TOC
{:toc}
 </details>
 
   <p></p>
 
 
![](10b2f781-2abf-4be1-bbb2-8d7171c1ad64.png)

## What is it?

Open Science is the practice of science in such a way that others can
collaborate and contribute, where research data, lab notes and other
research processes are freely available, under terms that enable reuse,
redistribution and reproduction of the research and its underlying data
and methods ([FOSTER Open Science
Definition](https://www.fosteropenscience.eu/foster-taxonomy/open-science-definition)).
In a nutshell, Open Science is transparent and accessible knowledge that
is shared and developed through collaborative networks (Vicente-Sáez &
Martínez-Fuentes 2018).

Open Science is about increased rigour, accountability, and
reproducibility for research. It is based on the principles of
inclusion, fairness, equity, and sharing, and ultimately seeks to change
the way research is done, who is involved and how it is valued. It aims
to make research more open to participation, review/refutation,
improvement and (re)use for the world to benefit.

There are several definitions of "openness" with regards to various
aspects of science; the [Open Definition](http://opendefinition.org/)
defines it thus: “Open data and content can be freely used, modified,
and shared by anyone for any purpose”. Open Science encompasses a
variety of practices, usually including areas like open access to
publications, open research data, open source software/tools, open
workflows, citizen science, open educational resources, and alternative
methods for research evaluation including open peer review ([Pontika et
al., 2015](https://f1000research.com/articles/6-588/v2#ref-59)).

![](abc115ff-ca30-47ae-93b3-21481e792c0d.png)

Pontika et al. (2015)

The aims and assumptions underlying the push to implement these various
practices have been analysed by Fecher & Friesike
([2013](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2272036)),
whose analyses of the literature found five broad concerns, or "schools
of thought". These are:

  - **Democratic school:** Believing that there is an unequal
    distribution of access to knowledge, this area is concerned with
    making scholarly knowledge (including publications and data)
    available freely for all.

  - **Pragmatic school:** Following the principle that the creation of
    knowledge is made more efficient through collaboration and
    strengthened through critique, this area seeks to harness network
    effects by connecting scholars and making scholarly methods
    transparent.

  - **Infrastructure school:** This thread is motivated by the
    assumption that efficient research requires readily available
    platforms, tools and services for dissemination and collaboration.

  - **Public school:** Based on the recognition that true societal
    impact requires societal engagement in research and readily
    understandable communication of scientific results, this area seeks
    to bring the public to collaborate in research through citizen
    science, and make scholarship more readily understandable through
    lay summaries, blogging and other less formal communicative methods.

  - **Measurement school:** Motivated by the acknowledgement that
    traditional metrics for measuring scientific impact have proven
    problematic (by being too heavily focused on publications, often
    only at the journal-level, for instance), this strand seeks
    "alternative metrics" which can make use of the new possibilities of
    digitally networked tools to track and measure the impact of
    scholarship through formerly invisible activities.

## Rationale

Open Science, as defined above, encompasses a huge number of potential
structural changes to academic practice, whose culture can often be
hierarchical and conservative. Moreover, even where researchers are
sympathetic to the aims of Open Science, they might not yet see the
worth in taking them up, as existing incentive mechanisms do not yet
reflect this new culture of openness and collaboration. As a
consequence, convincing researchers of the need to change their
practices will require a good understanding not only of the ethical,
social and academic benefits, but also of the ways in which taking up
Open Science practices will actually help them succeed in their work.
This section will describe some of the core concepts, principles,
actors, and practices in Open Science, and how these fit within a
broader research ecosystem.

![](442f81f3-0d09-49d5-81de-1b66108a995a.png)

## Learning objectives

1.  Understand the social, economical, legal, and ethical principles and
    concepts underpinning Open Science.

2.  Become familiar with the history of Open Science, and the disparity
    and diversity of views from different research communities,
    disciplines and cultures.

3.  Gain insight into the developments around Open Science, and the
    personal impact these can have on researchers, research, and society
    more broadly.

## Key components

![](5aa02f48-8009-410e-aca0-4519e92bab40.png)

## Knowledge & Skills

  - Open Science is the movement to help make the results of scholarly
    research more accessible, including code, data, and research papers.
    
      - It encompasses many different but often related aspects
        impacting the entire research lifecycle, including open
        publishing, open data, open source software, open notebook
        science, open peer review, open dissemination, and open
        materials (see glossary for definitions).

<!-- end list -->

  - History of Open Science, and the motivations behind the movement.
    
      - The origins of academic publishing began in the 17th century
        with the first academic journals.
    
      - Increasing motivation to share resources between research
        disciplines, as well as increased transparency for greater
        efficiency, rigour, accountability, sustainability for future
        generations, and reproducibility.
    
      - Ethical cases whereby increased transparency can reduce fraud,
        data manipulation, and selective reporting of results.

  - Present state arose from pressure from research academies and
    governments for publicly-funded research to be shared more openly,
    often for the purpose of accelerated societal or economic growth and
    innovation.
    
      - Publicly funded research outputs should be publicly available.
    
      - Need to drive cultural change in research and amongst
        researchers.
    
      - Embracing of Web-based tools and technologies to facilitate
        scientific collaboration.

  - Differences and commonalities within Open Science practices,
    principles and communities.
    
      - It is generally accepted that Open Science leads to increased
        impact associated with wider sharing and re-use (e.g., the
        so-called "[open access citation
        advantage](https://sparceurope.org/what-we-do/open-access/sparc-europe-open-access-resources/open-access-citation-advantage-service-oaca/oaca-list/)").
    
      - Open Science could increase trust in science and in the
        reliability of scientific results.

  - Open Science and relations to licensing, copyright issues.
    
      - Typically, open research outputs are openly licensed in order to
        maximize re-use while allowing the creator to retain ownership
        and receive credit for their work.

![](2b202773-ec41-4cde-8558-44800112ec6d.png)

## Questions, obstacles, and common misconceptions

Q: "What is the difference between Open Science and ‘science’?"

A: Open Science refers to doing traditional science with more
transparency involved at various stages, for example by openly sharing
code and data. Many researchers do this already, but don’t call it Open
Science.

Q: "Does ‘Open Science’ exclude the Humanities and Social Sciences?"

A: No, the term Open Science is inclusive. Indeed, the case is that
sometimes Open Science is more broadly referred to as ‘Open Research’ or
‘Open Scholarship’ to be more inclusive of other disciplines, principles
and practices. However, Open Science is a commonly used term at multiple
levels and so it makes sense to adopt it for communication purposes,
with the proviso that it includes all research disciplines.

Q: "Does Open Science lead to misuse or misunderstanding of research?"

A: No, the application of Open Science principles is in fact a safeguard
against misuse or misunderstanding. Transparency breeds trust,
confidence and allows others to verify and validate the research
process.

Q: "Will Open Science lead to too much information overload?"

A: It is better to have too much information and deal with it, than to
have too little and live with the risk of missing the important parts.
And there are technologies such as RSS feeds, machine learning and
artificial intelligence that are making content aggregation easier.

![](78242a58-956c-4a6f-8d50-a93e47eb21b4.png)

## Learning outcomes

1.  Be able to explain the core underlying academic, economic, and
    societal principles and concepts supporting Open Science, and why
    this matters to you in terms of broader impacts.

2.  Develop an understanding of the numerous dimensions of Open Science,
    and some of the tools and practices involved in this.

3.  Be familiar with the present state of Open Science, and the
    diversity of perspectives that this encompasses.
    
    ![](28184297-5028-4ac9-bc5f-7a459edf50cf.png)

## Further reading

  - European Commission's Directorate-General for Research & Innovation
    (RTD) (2016). Open innovation, Open Science, open to the world - a
    vision for Europe.
    [ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/open-innovation-open-science-open-world-vision-europe](https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/open-innovation-open-science-open-world-vision-europe)

  - Fecher and Friesike (2014). Open Science: One Term, Five Schools of
    Thought.
    [doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8\_2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8_2)

  - High Level Group (2017). Europe's future. Open innovation, Open
    Science, open to the world: reflections of the Research, Innovation
    and Science Policy Experts (RISE).
    [doi.org/10.2777/79895](https://doi.org/10.2777/79895)

  - Masuzzo and Martens (2017). Do you speak Open Science? Resources and
    tips to learn the language.
    [doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.2689v1](https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.2689v1)

  - Watson (2015). When will ‘Open Science’ become simply ‘science’?.
    [doi.org/10.1186/s13059-015-0669-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-015-0669-2)

<div class="section fnlist" data-role="doc-footnotes">

</div>
